hi everyone laszlo Montgomery again
another China history podcast our 99th
we're into triple digits starting with
the next one we we we the royal china
history podcast o sir i read a piece
last month in Jeremy gold corns
world-renowned Don Wacom site about
Sydney rittenberg the piece was written
by alison carroll goldman it's dated
august 3rd if you want to check that out
on John wait calm now Sydney rittenberg
was a topic on my list I think from the
earliest days of the China history
podcast the man who stayed behind if
you're hearing this name for the first
time in your life other than the surname
which sort of gives away his Jewish
ancestry you're probably wondering who's
he what did he do to merit inclusion
into the China history podcast and many
of you are also wondering hey you did
three European Jesuits last time and now
another western guy what's with the
foreigners this phenomenon dawned on me
sometime beyond the point of no return I
was almost done researching city written
Berg's historic life I promise what the
next history episode will have a no
Western policy Sydney retin Berg just
turned 91 last month he's living up in
the gorgeous Pacific Northwest of the
u.s. with his wife 56 years you'll in
like many of these people I have
mentioned in previous podcasts there's a
lot of them come to think of it there's
the Jesuits Ruggieri Ricci shawl and
bear Beast we also did Sir Robert Hart
Carl crow and in CHP 62 we featured four
foreigners who are interred at Papa
John's cemetery Anna Louise strong Agnes
smedley George Hatton and Israel Epstein
Sydney rittenberg had met them all knew
them personally well one more for your
collection today Sydney rittenberg his
life is being featured in a recent
documentary you can go buy it on DVD
it's called the revolutionary Irv
Dresden is the producer writer narrator
and interviewer his partner in this
documentary is Lucy
strander who conceived and produced the
film you could get more info at
revolutionary movie.com Lucy ostrander
new of Sydney rittenberg from the work
she did on her master's thesis a film
about Anna Louise strong back when Anna
Louise strong was in yen on meeting all
the leaders whose names we have
mentioned a hundred times or more in
many of these podcasts with Sydney
written burgers served as her
interpreter he was part of that fabled
elite group of foreigners who signed up
early on in the program and made their
way to you non in northern shaanxi and
began to carve out a life for themselves
and the new China a lot of foreigners
were cycling in and out of yen on in the
late 30s and into the 40s Israel Epstein
Gunther Stein Agnes medley Edgar and
Helen snow Owen Lattimore James Bertram
so many other reporters and scholars
those were heady days this period in
China mid to late 40s was a transition
period where the jinggangshan and Long
March Mao Zedong began to change into
the all-wise all-powerful aloof and
unapproachable great communists age
Chairman Mao who has been featured in so
many podcasts already he's been gone for
36 years but the enormity of his
presence today and the consequences of
his policies and whims still echo today
he was bigger than life even in death
during those yen on days after the Long
March after Mao had defamed Wan Ming and
was the undisputed champion of the CPC
he was still an approachable guy Sydney
rittenberg was there and mingled easily
with the Chairman and not only Mao
premier Joe and lie Marshall Judah chong
ching I you know everyone he knew them
all there was this magical time in the
late 40s when the Civil War was raging
but everyone on the Communist side sort
of knew they were going to come out on
top in every journalist with a stamina
was beating a path to Mouse
cave to interview this communist
revolutionary and possible future leader
of China although the nation was still
convulsing in civil war and a whole
range of atrocities were happening all
around young on was a beehive of
activity and Sydney rittenberg had the
good fortune to be at the right place at
the right time he saw it all he
remembered it and he wrote all about it
he wasn't just any old fly on the wall
either he sat at the table and even when
it was all happening Sydney rittenberg
was fully cognizant that he was
witnessing history right before his eyes
he knew these men especially ma première
Joe were historic men even in their own
time Sydney rittenberg was born in
August fourteenth 1921 same birthday as
the Gwangju Emperor and Magic Johnson he
was a southerner from the great city of
Charleston South Carolina where the u.s
Civil War began in 1861 he was raised in
relative comfort his father being a
successful local attorney his parents
fought constantly and he didn't get on
too well with his mother from early on
despite the relative comfort he was
raised in Sydney had a strong sense of
fairness in a true belief in that old
maxim that everyone deserved a fair
shake a couple of the monumental causes
during his early days in the 30s growing
up in the south with civil rights and
labor he fought for civil rights and he
fought for labor rights and he naturally
gravitated towards communism and the
radical student movement of the early
1940s he was 22 years old 1943 when he
joined the army he was based in Oregon
when the call came for him to enroll in
this Japanese language program said he
didn't want to do this the prospects of
ending up as a cog in the wheel of the
Japanese occupation forces didn't appeal
to him at all he was looking to serve
his stint get out and come back to the
US and like Sydney rittenberg said
that's exactly what he did only it took
35 years to
back he did what he had to do and he got
himself into the Chinese language
program and from there in September 1945
his life in china began in earnest he
went from the genteel south and a life
of college and community organizing for
the rights of workers blacks and the
altogether oppressed to a life in
wartime could mean actually was post-war
time little boy and fat man had already
been dropped the month prior and the war
in the Pacific had just ended so Sydney
rittenberg arrived in China just in time
for the end of one war and the
resumption of another the nationalists
and communists have been forced into an
unholy alliance to fight the Japanese
now that that was taken care of they
quickly turned on each other appearances
were kept up for the sake of the United
Nations and so the sharod of ccp kmt
cooperation you know appeared normal on
the surface the drama was heating up by
the day and Sydney rittenberg
unwittingly walks right into this
unforgettable time in history once he
got himself acclimated you know the lay
of the land and could Ming it was only
natural that this born leftist and
nierenberg would gravitate to the side
of the Communists his relationship
begins with them in the form of little
favors he was in the position to do for
them when he was in a position to aid
them even in a small way he did it and
this is how it all started one thing led
to another it was at this time that he
was given the Chinese name that he would
forever be known by in China in the late
autumn 1945 he became Lee done by this
is sort of a transliteration Chinese
style of his surname rittenberg leading
by well November 1945 the operation in
kunming that had been so essential to
the war effort to defeat Japan was
closed down the US military shut down
the operation pulled up stakes and began
arranging to send everyone back home
Sydney rittenberg was just getting
comfortable with his surround
and he was very much liking what he saw
Sydney looked around at what he saw and
he believed that he had a role to play
in China he wasn't sure what it was but
he knew his future was there so he
decided to stick around his first move
after could Ming was to Shanghai since
he had already proven himself with the
Chinese Communists and sympathizers and
could mean he didn't have too much
trouble getting hooked up in Shanghai in
kunming Sydney written Berg's official
role was to act as an investigator into
civil cases filed by the locals against
the US Army he carried out basically the
same role in Shanghai he starts mingling
with many of the Shanghai Communists as
well as Madame Sun yat-sen song Ching
Ling older sister by five years to
Madame Chiang kai-shek song Ching Ling
will cover in a future podcast she was
quite a powerhouse and an extremely
influential woman in her day this was
only partly due to her late husband sun
yat-sen she had taken Sydney rittenberg
under her wing he clearly was looking
for a way to remain in China the US
military was heading for the exits and
by the end of nineteen forty-five a lot
of drama was about to unfold that Sydney
rittenberg would witness firsthand song
Ching Ling pulled a few strings and got
Sydney a job at unruh the united nations
relief and rehabilitation administration
he becomes a UN observer to the war
relief efforts paid 600 a month plus
sixteen dollars daily per diem is Sydney
rittenberg tells the story he got to see
how the relief effort was carried out in
the nationalist controlled areas and in
the areas controlled by the communists
he took a US Navy vessel to Wuhan first
we've mentioned the city a hundred times
in the China history podcast so much
history in and around those three cities
of wu chun hun Cohen Han yang this is
his first posting he meets many people
there who are all written into the
history books most notable wan jun and
lee hsien yen these two of the Eight
Immortals I mentioned in a previous
podcast were lifelong friends of Sydney
rittenberg well Sydney did his observing
was pretty affected
by what he saw his route took him
through the very center of hunan
province from changsha to honey on in
the short time he had been there not
even a year he felt that special
attraction to China that so many of us
feel and he was determined to stay so he
got a good taste of relief operation KMT
style next up was a similar relief
operation to a communist controlled area
in the thaw p.m. mountains which border
Hobeika not a non play this is the
center of central China he meets up with
his friends one John and Leigh schengen
again and this gives him amazing street
cred because of those two at the time
were very important and very effective
on the PLA food chain both will be
featured in future podcasts they're in
the doppia mountains he meets another
epic hero of China who jumped in and out
of Sydney written Berg's life for the
entirety of his 35 years in China this
great man was Joanne ly meeting Joanne
lie hid a profound effect on Sydney
rittenberg as I guess input on anyone
meeting premier Joe gave Sydney that
that final push that led him to a clear
sense of purpose with what he wanted to
do with his life in China premier Joe
had suggested to Sydney to look him up
in Nanjing where you know he had a base
of operations of time and from that
point onward especially as his Chinese
became more and more fluent he began to
play that role as the American advisor
and the smartest man in the room
wherever and whenever matters of the
English language were concerned this was
a flexible kind of a role that allowed
him to be useful and necessary for all
kinds of projects negotiations diplomacy
propaganda or whatever he did this in
the doppia mountains then again when he
was back in Shanghai Sydney called I'm
premier Joe in Nanjing also meeting his
immortal wife thong you ciao it was then
that the great one suggested Sydney
visit yen on to see for himself what the
Communists were doing the stark contrast
of how the CC
he carried out relief versus the kmt
impressive me rittenberg by going to yen
on he could see for himself how the
Communists did things on a much grander
scale so he made up his mind that his
destiny awaited him in yen on so that's
where he went so that's where he went
next and the rest as they say became
history four months later he was yet
unbound accompanying the writer Mildred
price I'm one of those you know China
relief organization deals in Beijing he
met with yet jian-yang who came to his
aid once when Sydney needed some heavy
lifting Marshall yeah told Sydney he
should go to the city of calgon which is
better known today as zhangjiakou
referred to in history is the north door
to Beijing there Sydney rittenberg mixed
with many of those who would later
become the elites of the party this
included the guy in charge of the area
Marshall niranjan the attitude at the
top was that for the sake of
counterbalancing their reliance on the
Soviets the Communists wanted to
establish relations with the u.s. access
to us know how in technology was also a
driving factor now we all know how it
turns out will slam the door and shine
his face till Nixon open it back up many
wasted years later but nobody knew that
was going to happen yet so Sydney retin
Berg really found his calling in life
and he believed by being at the right
place at the right time with his fluency
and Mandarin of Chinese culture who
better than he to act as that necessary
bridge that could not only join these
two great countries together at this
historic time but also play an important
role in maintaining those relations that
was in mid to late nineteen forty six
officially he might have been just the
local English expert but this got him
dragged into almost every single
diplomatic related matter that involved
communications with the Americans Sydney
rittenberg was the go-to guy and on not
only for polishing a diplomatic cable
but for advice as well no one knew
America or the American psyche as well
as Sydney did so it was only natural
that he was privy to a lot of secrets
and closed-door meetings and you know
one-on-one consultations about how
Americans might react about this or that
calgon zhangjiakou being a communist
stronghold made it a target for KMT
bombing missions when heat got turned up
to high marshal niranjan advised Sydney
to start heading to yen on so off to yen
on he went a month and a half long trek
through the rough terrain of hebei Inner
Mongolia shaanxi and shaanxi october
nineteenth nineteen forty six Sydney
rittenberg in his retinue arrived and
yen on just in time for the usual
Saturday evening activities on Friday
nights in yen on that was movie night
they got to see whatever Hollywood films
they could procure and Saturday night
that was dancing night a bevy of
revolutionary beauties were rounded up
and be right there in the caves of yin
on they held these dances and of course
Mao was there he enjoyed this kind of
thing and it was always a way to sort of
hold court over his subjects and put on
that act that he did and play the role
of the alpha male in front of everybody
mouth was out on the dance floor Sydney
rittenberg recalled when he walked in
and mouse stopped dancing mid-step and
turned to face him after all you know
that white face was always a head turner
Chairman Mao stood Stockstill and faced
him and of course Sydney retin Berg was
led forward and introduced two mouths a
dome being such a great moment in Sydney
rittenberg long and rich life he
remembered it well the handshake it was
firm but Mao was one of those guys who
just sort of extended his hand it didn't
shake or pumper you know do any of the
usual stuff and Miles said we are happy
to welcome an American comrade here to
take part in our work and just like that
Sydney vividly recall that seeing mile
for the first time was so striking and
that he looked just like any number of
dramatic portraits a mile that you know
had been making the rounds
it truly was an amazing moment just a
few years before Sydney rittenberg was a
college student at Chapel Hill chest
deep and Marxism Leninism and a whole
communist ball of wax busy organizing
and fighting for the oppressed and now
here he was a 25 year old kid still a
novice in China sitting on a bench
chit-chatting with Mao Zedong while the
band played American traditional
standards like turkey in the straw
swanee River my old Kentucky home and
you are my sunshine Sydney got that
first experience of being one-on-one
with Mao and how that chairman would
shut out everything in the room and
focus intently on what you were saying
and listen to every word was quite an
extraordinary moment but this I guess is
the story of Sydney rittenberg a whole
long concatenation of extraordinary
moments an ordinary guy from Charleston
South Carolina rubbing elbows with
revolutionaries who were already making
history and newspaper headlines around
the world he would continue mixing with
all these guys in one form or another
for the next three decades Lenin is
often wrongly credited with the
derogatory term useful idiot used to
describe those foreigners who listened
to all the propaganda and believed in
all the BS and you know because of this
they were often useful for all kinds of
political and diplomatic situations
Sydney rittenberg met mahou many times
over the course of his life and said he
didn't think mile liked him too much for
whatever reason it was always hard to
tell where he stood with Mao I guess if
you weren't in prison he liked you some
have argued about whether this term
useful idiot should be applied to all
these Westerners like Sydney rittenberg
who stayed on in China after 1949 I
don't think so that amazing first
evening in yen on for Sydney rittenberg
was magical everyone was there was like
an index to a history book Judah and his
wife kanka ching chong ching chong chang
you know so many others they all welcome
Sydney and all the English skills
he brought with him they immediately had
a use for him as a polisher of reports
and diplomatic statements that they
needed to make and of course you know he
was called and constantly to serve as an
interpreter during the yen on days he
was still clinging to the false hope
that the US and the new China would find
a way to reconcile and that he could
play a role in bringing the two together
he lived in a cave just like everyone
else there yin on being the land of
caves that had been naturally carved
into the cliffs of northern shiny she
because he was a westerner of course he
was given certain privileges which
included being allowed to eat with the
leaders dis included Joe Enlai who
arrived in yen on in November 1946 City
rittenberg applied for membership in the
Communist Party he had Wang Chun and lee
hsien n nominate him and is required he
needed and received approval from the
five top guys at the time Mao Zedong
Joanne lie Leo Shao Qi Judah Aaron be
sure there weren't too many other
Americans accorded this honor I think ma
hide the George hatem who we discussed
in CHP 62 was the only one at the time
remember when John Ching arrived in yen
on and the whole scandal with mall you
know things like this that make up all
the rich anecdotes from Chinese history
we read all about them in our history
books but Sydney rittenberg he was there
when the whole drama was unfolding well
at this time in yen on Sydney rittenberg
had been assisting and interpreting for
Anna Louise strong she remained beloved
of China's leaders all the way up till
the day she died she left yen on in
March 1947 it's right around this time
March April May nineteen forty-seven
that the scent of the nationalist defeat
became much greater Mao led his generals
to one strategic victory after another
the tide was decidedly turning against
the Nationalists effort in the civil war
the American diplomats and NGO people
all started a pack up and
get out Sydney rittenberg he decided to
become the man who stayed behind and he
retreated to the relative safety of the
thi huong mountains october 1947 he
married Waylon he winds up living in a
small village in Hunan Province he
contacts TB but gets through it alive by
the early part of 1949 the lessons
learned during the yen on rectification
movement were used once again the CCP so
close to succeeding started to sort
things out one final time and settle
scores that still needed to be settled
when these kinds of things happened you
really never knew if you get caught up
in the dragnet Sydney rittenberg sure
didn't then out of nowhere boom January
21st 1949 reality comes crashing down on
Sydney rittenberg and he is arrested and
taken away his crime accepting
instructions from US imperialists to
sabotage the revolution the real reason
though was because Joe Stalin had
specifically ordered ma to do this back
in those days all Uncle Joe had to do
was snap his fingers and the Chinese
generally did what he asked in this case
they jailed a good friend of China and
threw him into a pitch-black prison cell
for one year he got to see light
whenever he was tortured or interrogated
they pulled all the usual tricks out of
the bag to get Sydney to confess but
confess to what he had no idea in the
spring of nineteen fifty Sydney was
released from the dark prison cell that
tried and failed to break his spirit
rather than break him the experience
added fuel to the fire in his belly to
right this wrong and teach his accusers
that he was someone who could be trusted
and was totally with the program in the
summer of nineteen fifty two he was sent
to Beijing number to prison where he
lived an annual regimen of endless
self-study marxism-leninism miles
thought classical Chinese he read
newspapers anything
get his hands on he recalls this prison
salt was quite big compared to the one
he had just left five by eight paces in
size Sydney rittenberg did two stints in
prison all the while in solitary
confinement this was the first of the
two both times he survived because he
kept control of his mind he had his ways
to cope with personal misery both times
he made the most of his incarceration
March fifth 1953 Joseph Stalin dies and
with that Sydney rittenberg won his
freedom and it was only later that he
learned it was Stalin's mistrust of Anna
Louise strong and Sydney's past
association and support for her that
angered Stalin and precipitated the
communicator Mao to lock this
troublemaker up actually to someone like
Stalin the less Americans hanging around
Mao potentially influencing his opinions
the better net hunch and Stalin's part
cost Sydney rittenberg six years of his
life from january 1949 to april nineteen
fifty-five his wife Whalen divorced him
while he was in prison but this turns
out to be a good thing later on Waylon
and Sydney were uneasy colleagues for
the rest of his days in China both
working for the same Don Wei or work
unit the radio administration his luck
changed for the better forever in may of
nineteen fifty-five he meets a 22-year
old colleague also at Radio Beijing
named Wang you lean there's a great love
story from the way they were
romantically set up their courtship and
when they finally got married on
februari 11th 1956 oh what a good time
in China was the Korean conflict is over
Chinese economic engine is almost firing
on all cylinders the People's Republic
of China was really starting to show
something to the world March 1957 Sydney
annulene have their first child a
daughter who would be followed by two
more girls and a boy life was good
because of his unique skill set
Sydney rittenberg really was an
important guy and did I say dependable I
mean he really was a good and devoted
communist he bought the whole program he
may have been white but he knew his
stuff as well as the next communist
theorists he lived a life of privilege
due to his high-level position at Radio
Beijing this was more due to that than
to his race other than that he lived
pretty much the same as the next guy in
similar societal circumstances well 1957
we all know what happens the sunshine of
Sydney's whole dream of the new China
starts to get a shade darker when the
aftermath of the hundred Flowers
movement was launched this is the anti
rightist campaign that sort of left a
bad taste in Sydney's mouth but he
remained devoted and on message but
early nineteen fifty eight well the
whole debacle of the Great Leap Forward
was now just beginning it would be part
of Sydney's job to travel around and
report from all over the country for
radio Beijing to get the word out about
how amazing and successful the Great
Leap was like Mao and the other top
leaders Sydney saw the potempkin version
of everything but he knew what was going
on behind the screen it was impossible
not to all you had to do was get out to
the countryside you can go check out CHP
episode 44 the story about the Great
Leap Forward then came Lucian and that
of course sent a strong signal to the
party elites to mind their manners when
daring to speak out against the chairman
right around the end of nineteen sixty
Sydney rittenberg like millions of
others began to notice how food was
getting scarce ER and scarcer meat and
then other foodstuffs week by week began
to disappear from the market shelves it
got to the point where all you had for
sales sometimes where the kinds of
vegetables and fruits that you throw
away because they were past their
sell-by dates then that too disappeared
they had whole horrific famine Sydney
rittenberg
him through it and never did a day pass
when he and his family didn't go to bed
hungry and he was one of the lucky ones
he watched the whole sino-soviet split
happen as it did in slow motion like a
train Racker two ships colliding Sydney
spent the famine years working with the
team in charge of translating the
selected works of mounted dome and this
was quite a prestigious project in
August of 1963 Sydney rittenberg is
summoned by mouth this was not an
everyday occurrence in his life not even
an annual occurrence mile needed him for
some work on a translation or something
and then in January 64 Cindy was part of
the delegation that mall hosted a
banquet for you know celebrating the
completion of the selected works at the
banquet mile apologized to Sydney
rittenberg personally about that you
know little six years in prison think
and he said he is a good comrade and we
treated him wrong and with this the Sun
began to shine more on Sydney rittenberg
there was a good amount of prestige that
came with getting this attention and
recognition from mall for most of
nineteen 64 and 65 Sydney rittenberg was
at the center of things and got involved
in more and more sensitive tasks things
were really going well but they were
very disturbing signs of class struggle
starting to bubble up during this period
Sydney attended many of the same
banquets and special functions as Mao
Joe and other party elites and you know
meeting visiting dignitaries you got to
see them all and mingle with them often
but all this attention and all the
privileges he enjoyed began to get under
Sydney rittenberg skin he never let go
of those egalitarian principles from the
yen on days he contrasted that with the
privileged lifestyle he was living in
1965 Beijing and he decided to walk the
walk and stop just talking the talk he
goes into complete and total
man-of-the-people mode
for seixas privileges sells all his
expensive furniture and adornments from
his house well I guess you could say
some colleagues began to look at him
like he was you know like the new cop on
the force oh you know wouldn't take the
payoffs and consequently made everyone
else look bad so with all this talk he
began to make some enemies or at least
lost the support of some friends when
you start messing with CCP perks and how
power is wielded you're really playing
with fire people were very sensitive
about this and you know this was like
the coin of the realm and the party in
may of nineteen sixty-five the ccr G we
all remember those guys from the
Cultural Revolution series the central
Cultural Revolution group that's formed
and five of the ten members went way
back to the N on days with Sidney
rittenberg and so began I suppose the
most painful period of Sydney written
Berg's life when the fuse had been lit
and the whole thing began to unfold his
friends and colleagues all advised
Sydney stay out of this whole Cultural
Revolution thing it's best you don't
play an active role lay low don't get
and tangled in the web of politics keep
your hands out of the fire when Sydney
got married to you lyn back in 1955 he
received advice also saying you know
don't rush in don't write any love
letters play it cool you know do it this
way but he totally went against this
advice and he had luck on his side and
he won her over now once again friends
were saying one thing and he just went
and did the total opposite he climbed up
and did a nice full swan dive right into
the center of the Cultural Revolution
this time he wasn't so lucky those crazy
days in 1966 when the conflagration was
just beginning to take hold Sydney
rittenberg watched it and involved
himself in everything going on when mile
put on that red armband on August
eighteenth 1966 Sydney rittenberg
watched it happen right in front of his
eyes a national day 1966 Sydney
rittenberg was right up there on the
Tiananmen viewing podium with all the
leaders and invited guests he mingled
freely with the likes of Joe and lie
Lynn be au au jus dung Xiaoping khong
chun li xiao qi Chagny in one of the
defining moments of sydney written
Berg's life he approached chairman mao
on the podium that day and he offered
his copy of the little red book and
asked the chairman uh you know sign his
little red book you know he was asking
for an autograph like many a movie star
and celebrity that followed my OS Sydney
what do you want me to write and Sydney
replied just write your name and this he
did mall the thumb three Chinese
characters written in the grass script
and a party photographer was on the
scene at the moment and snapped a photo
right as it happened and it's this photo
that forevermore became the defining
photograph of Sydney ripping Berg's life
in China I have it on my website if you
want to go check it out there and that
photo you see Sidney retin bird standing
next to mom and the chairman pen in his
right hand the book in his left pausing
to write his name it's really a great
photo Sydney rittenberg street cred was
already riding high but after this photo
got around and everyone knew he had
shaken the great helmsman's hand come
everyone wanted to get close to that
magic he was at the height of his career
in China perhaps with this popular
support and all these accolades it drove
Sydney to embrace the Cultural
Revolution with even more enthusiasm he
was right in the middle of struggle
sessions and all the negotiations
between all the various hot-headed
factions of Red Guards he was out
marching and speaking out at meetings
and got really caught up in the moment
but again with the attack on privileges
and demanding equality and whatnot he
was unknowingly treading on sacred
ground he thought this was what the
Cultural Revolution was about but then
again you know whatever Mao decided at
the time was the script for the whole
crazy movement so there was Sydney
rittenberg 45 year old rebel amidst all
these young teenage and college red
guards
speaking out and taking charge he
thought he was doing right he thought he
was doing good boy was he in for a
surprise the beginning of the end came
for Sydney retin burg on the last day of
the year nineteen sixty six if you
recall from the Cultural Revolution
series you had all these takeovers
happening where Red Guards would just go
in on mass and seize control of some
local party or government headquarters
organization this happened at the place
where Sydney worked broadcast
administration it happened time and
again these Red Guards would seize power
somewhere and then as soon as they had
it they would be ripped apart by
factionalism 1967 was a year of chaos
and horror Sydney rittenberg was on the
cannon men viewing podium again for the
1967 May Day celebration it was on this
occasion that he looked at chairman mao
from across the room up there on the TNI
men viewing podium and he saw man who
really for the first time ever was in
complete despair this whole Cultural
Revolution thing was starting to go awry
and he had no idea how to stop it or at
least stop it gracefully there was no
way to fight a forest fire with a single
fire extinguisher a national day 1967
Sydney didn't get an invitation to the
podium now the tide was turning mouch
Ainge his mind and tried to tamp down
all the madness that meant Sydney
rittenberg and all the other outspoken
hotheads got it first you know in China
under the communist system anyways at
the top before the axe Falls you always
see it coming the freezing cold shoulder
of party disapproval is unmistakable
when it happens Sydney had four small
kids three girls 7 9 and 10 and a young
son only two years old he saw it coming
and cometh did Christmas Day 1967 he's
placed under house arrest and that's
when the interrogators began showing up
and you know doing their thing and then
one
the hallmarks of the one-party state the
knock on the door at midnight while for
Sydney rittenberg it came at 11pm but
sure enough there was a knock on the
door late at night and on one of the
coldest nights Beijing had ever seen in
recent memory security officers from his
Don Wei the radio administration came to
take him away it was februari 21st 1968
he knew he was going to be gone for a
while and he painfully said goodbye to
his family he wouldn't see them for 10
years he didn't know it at the time but
as soon as they bundled him up and got
him into a car and on the way to prison
they went and took you lean and the kids
to you know how it is just as I said in
the Cultural Revolution series when you
got whacked your whole family felt the
pain to you lyn went through the same
difficulties and unendurable suffering
as her husband it was about a two-hour
drive to the prison if it'd been 13
years since he had been released in
april nineteen fifty-five sydney
rittenberg probably had a very good idea
what fate awaited him he put his whole
entire being into survival mode and
faced it head on the next three years
were terrible terrible times of solitary
confinement mental torture
interrogations all the while listening
to the sound of fellow prisoners and
surrounding cells get beaten and
tortured and each winter Sydney
rittenberg face down a bitter Beijing
style chill that just served as a
24-hour reminder of the harshness of
your life circumstances in that prison
over time and with careful reflection
Sydney rittenberg came to learn all
these things he was screaming for
attacking the authorities for holding
back the masses promoting democracy
within the context of marxism-leninism
mounted on thought attacking the old
party system this is what he believed
mal called for but with Sydney
rittenberg
able to recognize was that despite
everything this wasn't what Mao actually
wanted the Gang of Four either and so he
had to go but one good thing that
brought a measure of stability and
pleasure to Sydney's usually unpleasant
life were the daily papers he kept
informed or at least as informed as one
could be reading the Chinese press back
then that's where he began to read all
about these amazing things that began to
happen first was ping pong players
visiting from America then Henry
Kissinger visiting and paving the way
for Nixon and then Nixon himself came
and went he got to read about what
happened to Lin Bo and then all the
sudden life began to look up again with
the seeming thaw in us-china relations
it looked as if Sydney rittenberg might
stage another come back and have a new
use for the political and diplomatic
message the Chinese leaders now wanted
to get out so things got better for him
in prison it came in the form of a
bigger and better prison cell lifting of
restrictions that were relaxed or done
away with altogether he read in his
prison about the April fourth Cian on
men incident fall of dung Xiaoping and
he felt the ground shake when the great
tongue Shawn earthquake leveled a city
and caused the death of a quarter
million people and when mild died in
September he had great emotions about
what this meant for China but Sydney
rittenberg shed no tears in Sydney SAT
alone in his prison cell one night in
early October when he heard the
unmistakable voice of Jung Ching
screaming as she was hustled into a
prison cell and he knew finally after so
many years and so many deaths and so
many ruined lives she finally got her
comeuppance with the fall of the gang of
four the sun finally came out not only
for sydney rittenberg but for almost all
these prisoners of the political kind on
november nineteenth nineteen
seventy-seven after nine years eight
months and a day sydney rittenberg
merged from a Beijing prison he soon
found out that it was Jung Chang and
Kang Jung who were the black hands
behind his arrest and incarceration his
children were now aged 20 19 17 and 12
he missed the pleasure of watching them
grow up but he was soon to find out they
missed their childhoods to the China
government offered as full and official
an apology as one could expect he was
given restitution back pay when the
family was reunited the government put
them all up on an entire first floor of
a wind of the Beijing friendship hotel
it was a very happy time happy reunion
and with the restitution money said he
took you lean to the US for a visit it
was his first time back in 30 years a
lot had changed between 1945 and 1977 he
came back to China but as you might
expect he had had enough he didn't like
what was happening with all the reforms
of the late 70s and 80s it was the yen
on spirit that drew him to China he
looked at where China was and decided it
was time to go back to the home he had
left behind in 1945 and that's what he
did the whole family moved to the US on
March seventeenth 1980 despite all those
years in China Sidney rittenberg had
never given up his US citizenship nor
did he ever renounce it for his next
chapter in life Sydney and hulen
discovered that with china's opening up
to the outside world there was a rush to
get into china and establish a base of
operation and it didn't take long for
big corporations to figure out that Gwen
she was everything in China and you
needed people to open up doors and get
you access to the key decision-makers
this was something Sydney rittenberg
just happened to have in a large supply
and so rittenberg & Associates was born
and many big us companies have
benefitted over the years through
Sydney's consulting work and door
opening skills that's the story of
Sydney rittenberg
and gentlemen this is about 1% of the
story all the details and fine print is
there for you to learn about if you want
to know more I suggest Sydney written
Berg's book the man who stayed behind
what I have introduced today was simply
the broad strokes this has been a life
well-lived and one that Thoreau would
have said was lived purposefully there's
a lot of videos on YouTube of Sydney you
could go check those out too and once
again the documentary film the
revolutionary you could go check that
out at revolutionary movie com that's
all i have for you this time next
episode numero siento was already
recorded a couple weeks ago so it's
ready to go and will be uploaded shortly
as I mentioned Ray Harris jr. yes the
Ray Harris from the history of world war
two podcast he flew all the way across
country to do this huh north episode
program with me so that's coming up next
and so this is laszlo Montgomery signing
off from lovely and sunny Claremont
California take care of you want and I
hope you'll join me next time for
another exciting episode of the China
history podcast